tags: javascript, programming, project, showkr
title:  Showkr - an in-browser application
date: 2012-02-11
----

Some time ago I made quite simple, but (I hope) useful web application
called [Showkr](http://showkr.org/). And now I decided to tell a story
about why and how I did that - I think that could be useful considering
growing popularity of in-browser applications.

Why
---

Flickr has quite heavy pages, and when you're watching full set of
photos, loading time of every next one is quite annoying (I've just
tried, and it takes up to a second on a fast connection).

And with Showkr you [open](http://showkr.org/#72157625002065401) a page,
wait for a reply from Flickr's API and then relax watching photos, they
are all on the same page. Especially given that everything is tailored
for such activity - just photos, comments and every meaningful hotkey
pair is mapped - `j`/`k`, `up`/`down`, `space`/`shift+space`. Welcome!

How
---

The first thing, which saved quite a bit of my time, is [Twitter
Bootstrap](http://twitter.github.com/bootstrap/). There is nothing to
tell, if you haven't heard about it yet - now you did. Gives pretty look
to your pages in almost no time.

Make
----

Another one is `GNU Make`. I never properly knew how to write Makefiles
- was scared in childhood by artifacts generated by autoconf/automake.
But some time ago I've started to use `make` as they use `rake` - for
some small tasks. In other words, like a simple organizer for shell
commands.

And after doing this for years I felt that time has come. CoffeeScript
wants to became JavaScript, templates want to became JavaScript,
`index.html` wants to be different for development and production, and
they don't really want to do it at improper times (like generating JS in
runtime).

So pretty and understandable Makefile has risen. And I'm going to cite
some moments so that not only I, but others can also be educated by
classics.

### Basics

So, I have a directory with CoffeeScript files, and I'd like to convert
them in JavaScript: nobody wants to include CS on client-side - that
just makes your site slower. Let's start with definition that we have
those files:

And a rule to compile them:

This can look quite nasty, but I'll explain syntax and it's not
impossible to live with it - it's useful and dense DSL (though you
probably could have something prettier). Makefile has:

-   variables
-   functions
-   rules

Everything else doesn't bother use. Here we have variable `SOURCE`,
which contains a result of execution of function `wildcard`. Both
variables and functions are retrieved (or executed) with `$(...)`
construction (excluding single-letter variables, then you can simply
write `$x`). Functions, naturally, desire some arguments.

Thing with a colon and indented body is a rule. Tells us that file with
`.js` extension placed in `build/` directory, depends on a file with
exactly some name, but in directory `app/` and extension `.coffee`.

This rule has two instructions or, in make-speak, recipes. Those recipes
are calls to usual shell commands, though every is executed in its own
shell instance (if you set variables here, they won't be saved). Every
recipe is printed to a standard output unless it starts with an `@` - in
this case it's hidden.

Also, make provides you with a number of
[variables](http://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.html#Automatic-Variables)
with strange-looking names. `$@` - file-target (which we want to get),
`$<` - first (and the only here) dependency. `$(@D)` - directory part of
target file name. I decided to stop worrying about directories being
created before they are necessary, and jsut started to create them
everywhere I write something to a file.

And a final (intermediate final) chord: rule which will make this work:

This rule is the first so that running just `make` will start it, it
tells us that rule `all` depends on some files and we have already
defined a rule for building those files. Which exactly files -
everything in `$(SOURCE)`, but with `app/` replaced with `build/`, and
`.coffee` with `.js`. That's understandable, our compilation depends on
having JS files in `build` directory. And every file depends on
corresponding CoffeeScript file, which we defined earlier.

Running `make` in directory will compile every source file to JS. More
than that, if you will run `make` again, it will only compile files
which were changed - `make` looks for a file change date and makes no
unnecessary moves.

It seems that nobody will need this, given that
`coffee -bco build/ app/` makes the same. Well, first of all, it's not
the same - it doesn't track file modification time, but compiles
everything (and you could have a lot of everything), and after that,
it's not only about CoffeeScript! But let's not get ahead of ourselves.

### Clean up

We have first incarnation of make file:

What can we clean up? Well, we don't need a list of source files, only
results, so let's change beginning of file this way:

### More

It's easier to understand now what main rule needs - targets. What do we
need now? We have to put all our generated stuff to `index.html`.

Small digression: I don't use \`require.js\`\_ here, since I'm too lazy
to make it work together with [ender](http://ender.no.de/), so modules
want to be loaded serially directly from the index page. In the other
case, I wouldn't have this part and `index.html` would be a static page,
but I believe right now it's a good excuse to write more rules.

So, our main rule wants `index.html`:

How do we generate it? I decided to do the right thing and take `awk` to
process it. Now index look like that:

And then I have an `awk` script, which takes `DEPS` environment variable
and puts it into html:

I don't want to make this article long with an explanation of make, but
you can read some [manual](http://www.grymoire.com/Unix/Awk.html) or
[google](http://www.google.com.ua/search?q=awk+basics) for more
documentation.

Rule for building index looks herewith:

What's new here? We remove directory name, referring to a variable [with
substitution](http://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.html#Substitution-Refs)
(similarly to `$(patsubst ...)`, which we used earlier). It seems that's
all: mkdir created a directory, awk read a script, changed a file,
redirected result to our target (`$@ == build/index.html`). Quite
elegant.

Now `make` will compile (if necessary) CoffeeScript and then
`index.html`.

### Production version

Now we have to compile version for deployment - single JavaScript file.
Okay:

Here `make prod` will take all dependencies of `prod/app.js` (`$^` is
another automatic variable and contains all dependencies of the rule)
and minify them in target location. And will compile `index.html`.

I should say that all those directory name replacements in variable
names annoy me a bit, so I will clean them up. That's what I got in the
end:

### Another else?

We have a nice Makefile already. Let's add templates! I have some in
`app/templates` directory with `.eco` extension and I'd like to see them
with extension `.eco.js` (to be differentiable from just `.js`).

Here `./eco.js` is a custom script to run Eco templates compiler, which
applies necessary wrapper to results (ender module boilerplate). It
takes two parameters - path to a file and module name
(`templates/something.eco`). Templates will be minified in a single file
with the application.

### Important details

JS file order is important to me (because Ender modules are
synchronous), so I just set them directly:

Article describes a situation when it's ok to have default sorting (f.e.
for [AMD](http://requirejs.org/docs/whyamd.html#amd)).

Function `wildcard` can't find files recursively, so when I have
subdirectories in structure, I use `$(shell find ...)` - your usual
`find`.

That's all, I hope, that I covered basics well enough. You can find full
contents of
[Makefile](https://github.com/piranha/showkr/blob/e8c4d838e0ee6c6dbf99e161b06e6e453a6e3793/Makefile)
(this link points to a version which existed in time when article was
written) in the [repository](http://github.com/piranha/showkr/).

Architecture
------------

Let's get back to actual application. It's built on top of
\`Backbone.js\`\_, which is probably most popular library for writing
MVC applications on JavaScript. That's not by randomness; Backbone
doesn't try to hide implementation details (as opposed to Ember, which
I've tried and was unhappy), but organizes everything very well.

### Core

Core part of application is a [Router](http://backbonejs.org/#Router)
`Showkr`. Application is started by constructing this router's object.

Main function, besides routing (calling functions by address in location
hash), is view management. Router can create
[View](http://backbonejs.org/#View) by an unique identifier and switch
between existing ones. Once created, views are not destroyed, so that
there is no need to wait for same data for Flickr again.

### The rest

The rest is simple - views initialize the models and inner views, models
fetch data from Flickr (using redefined `sync` and `parse` methods).

Most of the models have some nested collection, so I've got a hierarchy
`User -> SetList -> Set -> PhotoList -> Photo -> CommentList -> Comment`.
Nested collections are initialized when model is initialized, but
`fetch` is started where it makes sense - photos are fetched right after
fetching set information, but comments only when photo is rendered.

To be honest, I have no desire to write detailed tutorial for Backbone -
there is a lot of them already. But if you're interested it's worth it
to look at [source](https://github.com/piranha/showkr).

Epilogue
--------

I had some thoughts to add Picasa support, but I'm a bit reluctant - I
don't use it myself, but API is vastly different, so it's a lot of work.
I would gladly accept patches though.

This article was written to guide those who need that to employ better
techniques and tools for build in-browser applications. I hope that
reading this article was interesting to you. And if you have any
questions which were not covered, just send a mail to me.
