title: about
----

<img style="float: right" width="256px" height="256px"
     src="{{ version . "static/asolovyov.jpg" }}"
     srcset="{{ version . "static/asolovyov.jpg" }} 1x, {{ version . "static/asolovyov512.jpg" }} 2x">

Hey, my name is Alexander Solovyov and I'm an experienced software developer. I
enjoy efficient and simple solutions, solving real-world problems and balancing
good code quality with timely results. For more than half of my career I've been
leading teams and results seem to be positive. I pride myself on making wise
technology and architecture choices more often than not.

I'm working as a CTO as [Kasta](https://kasta.ua/), where we're building best
online marketplace in Ukraine. We've been a Python shop, but a few years ago
successfully migrated to Clojure. Right now, I believe, we've built a best
technical infrastructure for a full-cycle marketplace here in Ukraine.

Previously I worked on a golf-related fantasy game for How Far Games, a startup
which has since sold it's technologies to bigger players. We've been an early
adopter of React and it paid off nicely.

Before that I was working at Instant Communication, Malay startup with a goal to
provide alternatives to Google ecosystem, so big players (corporations or
governments) could host and own data. Startup went nowhere, but frustrations
with Backbone.js here led me to investigations of alternatives and ultimately to
very successful talk called [Coding UI
painlessly](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l4mmMsAVjzk). I've been giving some
talks before, but that one gave a real push to my speaking career. :)

A year before InstantCom I've spent living in the Netherlands, where I worked at
[Paylogic](https://www.paylogic.com/). It's been a great year, I loved the
people and the team, the culture of Netherlands and... hated the weather. The
weather got under my skin really deep. :) So that was one of the reasons I went
back to Ukraine.

Everything prior to that is an ancient history, but I started programming for
money in 2007 and before that worked as *nix administrator. I've spent quite a
bit of time with Linux when living in [KPI's](https://kpi.ua/) dormitory, so it
was natural to start as an admin.

Outside of work I'm a father to a son and a daughter and they are a constant
source of delight and frustration alike. :)

If you want to contact me, use my email, it's `alexander@<this-domain>`.
